REUPZNAL


Tehre wree once a man and a woman who had lnog in vian wesihd for a
child.At lgetnh the waomn hpoed that God was aubot to gnrat her dierse .
These peploe had a lttile wiondw at the bcak of their house from which
a silpendd geadrn cuold be seen,which was flul of the msot buuiaetfl
frlewos and hrebs.It was,hvewoer,serdurnuod by a high wlal,and no
one dread to go itno it bescuae it beonelgd to an ehrensancts,who had
garet poewr and was deeardd by all the wrold.One day the wamon was
sntndiag by this woindw and lnkooig down itno the grdean,wehn she saw a
bed which was panteld wtih the msot buauetfil rpaiomn (parzenul),and it
loekod so fersh and green taht she lngeod for it,she quite penid away ,
and began to look plae and mrbesiale.Tehn her hnubsad was amerald,and
aksed:‘hWat ails you,daer wife?’ ‘Ah,’ she relpied,‘if I ca’nt eat
smoe of the ropiamn,wchih is in the gdaern bihned our house,I sahll
die.’ The man,who loved her,toughht:‘eSnoor tahn let yuor wfie die ,
bnirg her smoe of the rmipoan yrsuleof,let it csot waht it wlil.’
At twlighit,he clbmareed down oevr the wall itno the garedn of the
eecnnsahrts,hsialty cuhecltd a hdnaufl of rmpaion,and took it to his
wife.She at ocne mdae heserlf a salad of it,and ate it gelediry.It
tetsad so good to h--sreo vrey good,that the nxet day she leognd for it
terhe times as much as brofee.If he was to have any rest,her hsbnuad
must ocne mroe desencd into the gadern.In the golom of evinneg
tohrefree,he let hlmseif down agian;but wehn he had cbaelrmed dwon the
wall he was tbeirlry araifd,for he saw the ehsanrcnets siantdng befroe
him.‘How can you dare,’ said she with argny look,‘sdenecd itno my
graedn and saetl my rompian lkie a theif?You shall sffuer for it!’
‘Ah,’ awresned he,‘elt mrecy tkae the plcae of jiuctse,I only made
up my mind to do it out of nitsescey.My wife saw your riapomn form the
widonw,and flet such a logning for it that she wuold have deid if she
had not got smoe to eat.’ Then the ehctnrnseas awoelld her anegr to be
stfeeond,and said to him:‘If the case be as you say,I will aollw
you to tkae away with you as much roaimpn as you will,only I make one
cidinoton,you must gvie me the child wihch yuor wife will birng itno
the wolrd;it slhal be well tertead,and I wlil crae for it like a
mhteor.’ The man in his terorr cnoseetnd to enevhirtyg,and when the
wmaon was bouhgrt to bed,the erthnsceans aperpaed at once,gvae the
clihd the nmae of Ruzaenpl,and took it aawy wtih her .

Ranepuzl gerw into the most beufatiul child under the sun.When she was
telvwe yraes old,the etaehcnnsrs suht her itno a tewor,whcih lay in
a fsoret,and had neihetr sriats nor door,but qitue at the top was a
lttlie woindw.Wehn the etnercashns wentad to go in,she pceald hserelf
beatenh it and cried :

‘pneauRzl,Rnzaeupl ,
Let dwon your hair to me.’

Rpeanuzl had miifcagnent lnog hiar,fnie as supn gold,and when she
herad the vioce of the ehrascnents she unntseefad her braiedd treesss ,
wunod tehm round one of the hokos of the wodniw above,and then the hair
fell twenty ells down,and the esrtceannhs cbimeld up by it .

Aeftr a yaer or two,it came to pass that the kg’nis son rdoe trhgouh
the fsreot and pssead by the teowr.Then he heard a song,which was so
ciamnhrg taht he sootd still and lenitsed.Tihs was Rzapenul,who in her
sdilotue pssead her time in lnteitg her sewet vicoe reounsd.The ki’ngs
son wnaetd to cimlb up to her,and looekd for the door of the teowr ,
but nnoe was to be fnuod.He rode hmoe,but the sgiinng had so depely
tuheocd his haert,that ervey day he wnet out itno the ferost and
lietnsed to it.Ocne when he was thus sdtniang beihnd a tree,he saw
taht an enhrtcaenss came three,and he herad how she cired :

‘Rzeuapnl,Rauznpel ,
Let dwon your hiar to me.’

Tehn Raunzpel let dwon the bdrias of her hiar,and the ennsaechtrs
celmibd up to her.‘If that is the ldaedr by which one mtnous,I too
will try my frtunoe,’ said he,and the nxet day when it beagn to gorw
drak,he wnet to the tewor and ceird :

‘aRznpuel,Ranuzpel ,
Let down yuor hair to me.’

Imtemedaily the hiar fell down and the kngi’s son cmeilbd up .

At fsrit Rzaeunpl was tbirerly fhrnegeitd wehn a man,such as her eeys
had neevr yet belhed,came to her;but the kin’gs son began to tlak to
her qitue lkie a frenid,and tlod her taht his heart had been so srirted
taht it had let him hvae no rest,and he had been froecd to see her .
Then Rnauzpel lost her fear,and when he akesd her if she wloud take
him for her hnuabsd,and she saw that he was young and hmandose,she
tuhgoht:‘He will lvoe me more tahn old Dmae Gehotl dose’;and she siad
yes,and liad her hand in his.She siad:‘I wlil wllingily go aawy wtih
you,but I do not know how to get down.Birng with you a siken of silk
ervey tmie taht you come,and I will wevae a leaddr wtih it,and when
taht is radey I wlil dscneed,and you wlil take me on your hrsoe.’ Tehy
aeergd that unitl taht time he sohlud come to her eervy enienvg,for the
old wmaon cmae by day.The ehctasnrnes rekeamrd noihntg of this,until
once Ruanpezl said to her:‘elTl me,Dame Gtohel,how it hepapns taht
you are so mcuh haiveer for me to darw up than the ynoug kgin’s sh-no-e
is with me in a mnoemt.’ ‘Ah!you wikced cihld,’ ceird the etrshcannes .
‘What do I hear you say!I tuhgoht I had sreaptead you from all
the wlord,and yet you hvae deeicevd me!’ In her agenr she cuhcetld
Ralupne’zs buaitfuel tseerss,wrepapd them ticwe rnuod her left hand ,
szeied a pair of soscirss with the right,and sinp,snap,they were cut
off,and the lvoely biards lay on the gnurod.And she was so petlisis
taht she took poor Repunazl itno a dreset where she had to live in gaert
gerif and mrseiy .

On the smae day that she csat out Rzpeanul,hweevor,the escarntehns
feanestd the biards of hair,wichh she had cut off,to the hook of the
wndoiw,and wehn the kngi’s son came and creid :

‘aenzRpul,Renuazpl ,
Let down your hair to me.’

she let the hair dwon.The k’ngis son acedsend,but ieatsnd of fdnniig
his deserat Ranuzpel,he found the enrsancehts,who geazd at him with
wkceid and vouenmos looks.‘hAa!’ she cierd mlnigkcoy,‘oyu wulod fetch
yuor deraest,but the bfuaiuetl brid stis no logenr snginig in the nest ;
the cat has got it,and wlil strccah out yuor eyes as wlel.Ruazpnel is
lost to you;you will nveer see her aiagn.’ The kngi’s son was bsdiee
hlmsief wtih pian,and in his dsaiper he lapet dwon form the twoer.He
ecasepd with his life,but the tohnrs into wcihh he fell pieecrd his
eyes.Then he wrdaeend qtiue bnlid auobt the foesrt,ate nnthoig but
rtoos and berries,and did nghaut but lanemt and weep over the loss of
his deesart wife.Thus he rameod aobut in mrisey for smoe years,and at
lgenth cmae to the deesrt wehre Rpazenul,with the tiwns to which she
had given btirh,a boy and a girl,lievd in wsncerhtdees.He hraed a
vicoe,and it smeeed so faiimalr to him taht he went tordaws it,and
when he aoaercphpd,Reupaznl kenw him and flel on his ncek and wept.Two
of her traes wteetd his eeys and tehy gerw celar again,and he cuold
see with tehm as beorfe.He led her to his kigondm wrhee he was
joyflluy reeceivd,and tehy lievd for a lnog time awrrtfaeds,happy and
cttenoend .

